Today I'm going to be talking about
training splits. This is a very popular
topic of conversation. In fact, I had
one brief conversation on YouTube where
I spoke about the very famous training
split pushpull legs. Pushpull legs. And
I kind of like just mentioned in
passing, but pushpull legs kind of seems
like a bit of a waste of time. Why would
you split your push and your pull when
you can do it together? which is, as you
guys know, if I'm programming for you
guys, I quite often like to superset my
push and my pull exercises. Instead of
doing a set of push and then waiting
however many minutes of rest between
sets, you can be having that rest period
and moving over to the opposing muscle
groups, which is not really superior in
terms of building muscle or building
strength, but it allows you to get twice
the amount of work in the same amount of
time. So, instead of dividing push and
pull sessions, I quite often do push and
pull in the same session. When I say
quite often, I would say pretty much
every time on the rare occasion when you
are strong enough or you're close to
competition, you and you want to really
focus on a heavy bench press as an
example, that's when I would do that as
a standalone. And I wouldn't have you
superset the opposing muscle groups. But
in your off season, even if you're a
super strong athlete in your offseason,
there's no reason why why you wouldn't,
unless of course you just love spending
time in the gym, which is the thing, and
that's something that I'm going to be
covering. So feel free to ask questions
as we go. But this whole session was
based on a couple of you guys asking
questions about why did I give you this
split and can you give me a reason why
you set out the program the way you did.
I can do one better. I can give you the
entire science and all the different
types of splits that we have. So if
there's anything that you'd like to ask,
anything that you disagree with, just
you know, just say the word and I'm here
to discuss. Now I'm going to start it
from the beginning. So training splits,
you know, we've got all the different
options you've got. You may have heard
of bro splits. You may have heard of
upper lower split. You may have heard of
pushpull legs or whole body splits. The
first thing we have to understand is
availability to the individual that's
performing the program. So if I'm on
boarding anybody, if I'm starting a new
relationship with a new client, I'm
going to be asking that question first.
That's going to dictate the trajectory
of the entire program is how many days
do you have available to allocate to
your training? So some people may not
have the leisure of having, you know,
whatever is considered to be optimal.
So, what I consider to be optimal for
maximizing strength and muscle building,
I would say four to five days. And I'm
going to go into greater depth with that
in a moment. But some people don't have
that available to them. There's no point
creating the best split and the be best
program and then figuring out that the
person you're working with can only
train two or three days per week for
whatever reasons. And there are a lot of
great reasons. One reason is their
general population and they just don't
want to allocate that much time to their
training. Maybe they're very busy
corporate type of people. they only
train two times per week. And if that's
the case, then then so be it. No, it's
not optimal, but we already know that
their job isn't to be the most muscular
or the strongest or or anything with
athletic performance. And so two times
per week may be the sweet spot for that
individual. And if that's the case,
they're not a bad person. They don't all
everyone doesn't prioritize their
training like, you know, us who are
industry professionals. However, there
are instances where 2 days per week is
optimal. Such as, you know, even at the
highest level when we're training an
athlete of a nonstrength sport such as
rugby player, martial artist, the team
sport athlete who need to be allocating
majority of their training week by to
playing their sport. And if that's the
case, then it's probably wise that they
allocate less time to their training. Of
course, it would be great to be as
muscular and as strong and all of these
things as possible. However, we have to
understand the cost of recovery of
training. And if this is going to
interfere with their ability to perform
maximally with their sport, which is
their priority, then we may be doing
them a disservice by increasing the
amount of days that they spend training
with weights. So, there's nothing magic
about any of these training splits,
right? So, when if if you ever hear
people debate about their training split
is better than yours, you know, I don't
know about agreeing straight away. As
long as they can justify why they using
that split, then that could be the
correct answer. Now, when we talk about
frequency, let's talk about, so this is
something that's quite important. Some
people come to us and say, I'm all
yours. I'll do as many days of training
as you recommend. I want the absolute
most out of my training. What do you
recommend? I'll train 7 days a week. So,
some people come to me with that. And my
response to that individual is 7 days a
week is not necessary. In fact, it's
actually not recommended. But something
we must also understand is some people
have their own life circumstances that
require them to be at the gym every day.
It could be a depression thing. It could
be coming out out of an addiction thing.
And setting them up with a daily routine
could be a crucial part of their mental
health. In which case, I'm not going to
say to that individual, no, you you
know, you need the rest. You're not
allowed to come into the gym. Okay? So
these are circumstances where I'll speak
to the individual and say although it's
not optimal I will make it work. The
greater the frequency the lower the
intensity. Okay. And the flip side to
that is also true. The lower the
frequency the greater the intensity
should be. Okay. Which we're also going
to be covering. However, when we do
have, you know, our entire life to
allocate to our training and we have no
other sports or or no other commitments
and we want to get as muscular and as
strong as possible, what is optimal
frequency? And a lot of the times the
research kind of covers you know one
times per week per body part versus two
times versus three times. And you know a
lot of the main research firstly let's
understand when it comes to research
there's not a huge amount of research on
this topic and of the research that does
exist a lot of the times the duration of
these studies is quite low. So what does
quite low mean? Well quite often the
research goes for about 8 weeks which
just so happens to be the length of a
university semester. So that's all
that's available. How much results, you
know, how much muscle can you build? How
much strength can you build in an 8week
period? The answer is some but not much.
Right? So to to base your entire life
over an 8we study doesn't make entire
sense. It doesn't mean we dismiss the
research, but we use it as a guide. So
let it guide you, but don't let it lead
you based on that. So that that's a
disclaimer out of the way saying that
although the research isn't perfect, a
lot of the research consistently comes
back at one time per week versus two
times versus three times as long. So
firstly as long as the volume is equated
there is very little difference between
either of these. Okay. However from a
practical standpoint and a logical
standpoint when we understand we need to
consider optimal training volume which
is going to be the next slide. Optimal
training volume when we're talking about
things like hypertrophy and strength
there are some differences. Strength is
slightly lower because typically
strength is using higher amounts of load
which need more recovery which prefers
less total sets per body part per week
or per movement pattern per week than
muscle hypertrophy where we're shifting
lighter loads and there is a higher
recommendation for greater amounts of
volume. Okay. So how much volume is
that? That's roughly 10 to 20 sets per
body part per week. That's what's
mutually agreed upon by all of the
authorities in our space in terms of
science and muscle building. 10 to 20
top sets per muscle group per week being
optimal. Now, here's the thing. 10 sets
to 20 sets, that's a large gap. So,
whether you do 20 sets per week is very
different to doing 10 sets. That's half
the amount of volume. So, which one is
it? My recommendation when it comes to
volume, if you were to have one, would
be start at the lowest end of that range
and if we need to, then we can gradually
increase. So my recommendation wouldn't
be to start at whatever is maximal
thinking I want the absolute best for me
so let's go straight to the top. You may
be able to achieve sufficient muscle
gain with the lowest amount available
and then if needed if we start to
plateau then we have something that's
available
to us or a training variable that's
available to us that we can modify to
potentially break through that plateau.
What do I mean by that? Let's speak in
English. If we're doing 10 sets per
muscle group per week and we get to a
point where we're plateauing for
whatever reason, we can explore the
potential for increasing the amount of
training volume, increase to 12 sets per
body part per week or 14 sets or
whatever it may be. Of course, I just
gave you even numbers. That's my OCD.
You are allowed to use odd numbers. And
just so that you know, a lot of the
times I don't really count the total
amount of sets in a in a program per
week. I typically just use what I
believe to be logical for the day. So
whenever I'm writing a program, I think
about the exercise and I think about the
weightlifted and the individual that I'm
applying it to. I'll have a main
exercise for the day. I'll have a
complimentary secondary exercise and
then maybe a third exercise for the day
that allows us to train things like
lowcost feel-good exercises that
complement that movement pattern. So
like training biceps or triceps after
our big bench press day or joint health
exercises to complement our strength
work. So quite often as you guys know
I'll do some you know rotator cuff work
or seratus anterior work or core work or
hip stability work at the end of our
session to complement the main work.
Okay. So these are the rules of the
program and I think about what's the
optimal amount of sets for each of these
exercises and I put myself in the
situation and usually we land on you
know I don't know how many sets for the
for the top set. Depends on how much
weight you're lifting. If it's a squat
and you're doing things like triple body
weight, I might do something like one to
two top sets for that main movement of
the day. If you're more of a beginner
and you're not able to even do body
weight yet, I might do something like
three to five top sets. Okay, when I say
three, I'm probably that's probably not
a lot of total work. And when I say
three, it probably means I'm going to
include a lot more accessory exercises.
So, there's no hard and fast rule. And
quite often whenever I'm writing a
program, I don't sit down and count the
amount of total sets. Usually I'm
looking at about an hour session and I'm
trying to fit in what is optimal within
that time frame. But either way, you get
the gist. Now, let's put yourself in
that scenario. Let's just say the total
amount of work per muscle group is 10
sets per week. What would you prefer to
do? 10 sets in one session or would you
prefer to split that up over two
sessions? Let's think about how you
perform those 10 sets. And let's just
say, not that you probably would, but
let's just say it was 10 sets of squats.
The first five sets of squats, how you
going to feel compared to the last five
sets of squats? the answer is quite
fatigued in that last five sets. So the
quality of work in the remainder of the
session is going to be substantially
lower than the than the first half of
the session. So a better option
logically is to split that up over the
week. So it's not a matter of doing more
total volume. It's a matter of doing
high quality work by splitting up that
workload in two sessions instead of
doing it all in one giant session. where
if you are doing it in one giant
session, which is what I've done on many
occasions and many people do, then quite
often the last half of the session, you
are performing usually a whole bunch of
junk volume that doesn't contribute to
too much muscle gain or strength gain.
Okay, so these are the things we need to
consider. So from a research standpoint,
when volume is equated, it doesn't seem
to make too much of a difference whether
you choose one time a week per body part
or two times or three times. But from a
logical standpoint, it makes more sense
to split it up over two times. So a lot
of the best researchers and
practitioners in our space consistently
land on optimal frequency per body part
per week being two times per week.
Research and practical standpoint,
practical application shows us that
there is a not a huge difference between
two times and three times per body part
per week. Okay? Now this is quite often
when we're talking about strength and
muscle building. When it comes to skill
acquisition, the rule changes. So, if
you're working with someone like a
professional or an Olympic level
weightlifter, weightlifterss love to
practice their skill every day, seven
times a week, multiple times per day in
some instances. Yes, it sounds extreme.
However, that's usually how the best of
the best train. So, what are we talking
about here? Skill acquisition or muscle
building? Well, there's the difference.
When it comes to skill acquisition, it's
a completely different rule. I'm talking
purely strength gain and muscle
building. Skill acquisition, we're using
lighter loads and practicing it more
time. The more practice we get, the
better it is. Okay, so there's frequency
for you. The outcome of frequency. So to
summarize that, you could say if you
only have one time per week available,
okay, go for it. But if you have the
option for increasing to two times per
week per body part, that's my choice.
That's my recommendation every time.
That's why super accumulation makes our
form so much better. Absolutely. So a
lot of the times when we have these
highfrequency programs, a lot of the
adaptations are neurological or
neuromuscular adaptations rather than
cellular adaptations. Okay? But either
way, the exception for this for
increasing frequency and doing these
things are specialization phases exist,
but they are not how you train
full-time. It's a phase and it's usually
quite shortlived because we just can't
handle the demands of, you know, double
day training forever. I've tried, trust
me, it didn't work. Okay, so this is
where we're talking about volume, which
I pretty much covered. So the volume is
the research shows us that 10 to 20 sets
per muscle group per week is that sweet
spot. Anywhere between that range. So
what's the practical way of considering
how many total sets we do? My
recommendation, start at the lower end.
So start at roughly 10 sets per muscle
group per week. And I'm not counting
warm-ups. I'm talking about top sets,
okay? 10 sets per muscle group per week.
And increase if you need to. So some
people love volume. And my
recommendation is, and some people have
even, you know, recommended that as you
get more and more advanced, your ability
to handle more volume increases, which I
kind of agree. However, you need to
factor in as you get more and more
advanced, your ability to handle more
load also increases, which needs to be
factored in when we're calculating total
volume. So, when we're calculating total
volume, I think of volume load, which is
reps times sets times the amount of
weights that's lifted. Okay? So, that's
volume load. So the stronger you get, so
let's just use the example. You got
lifter A that's lifting 10 x 10 on 100
kg versus lifter B that's lifting 10x10
on 200 kg. What's the difference in
these individuals? Lifter A is probably
a lot smaller and lifter B when they
perform their 10x10 is at the end
of the day. Excuse my language. Okay, so
I probably would consider for lifter B
that's doing twice the amount of weight
or two times body weight or 200 kg for a
10x10. Firstly, don't do 10 x 10.
Secondly, if you were to do it, I would
use a much longer rest period in
between. And then if you were to do it,
I would probably consider giving you an
entire week to recover from that body
from that session versus the person
doing half the load would need less time
to recover between sets and less time to
recover between sessions. So therefore,
load should be considered when we're
calculating total volume. The stronger
the individual, the longer rest between
sets and the longer rest between
sessions. Okay, now that's for
hypertrophy. I should have put in there
for strength. There are differences in
total recommendations. Usually the
research points to research and I will
say practical application absolutely
supports this. Anywhere between 6 to 12
total top set. So this is research by
Dr. Rya and colleagues. I believe it was
2009 somewhere around then. It was older
research but I believe it's still
correct that suggested that 6 to 12
total sets per movement pattern not
muscle group movement pattern per week
is optimal frequency. So what's the
difference? So when we're talking
hypertrophy, we think about building
quads, building glutes, building lats,
building pecs. When we talk about
strength building, we're talking about
building a squat pattern, building a
bend pattern, building a push, building
a pull pattern. Okay? So there's a big
difference as well as you know the the
amount of so that's compound movements
usually versus you know in many
instances isolation exercises. Compound
movements don't just train one muscle
group. So when it comes to optimal
frequency, how many times per muscle
group per week? There is a difference
between strength and hypertrophy
outcomes. When it comes to hypertrophy,
it's higher volume recommendations. When
it comes to strength, you are shifting
heavier loads. You want to do as much
volume as you can and still be able to
recover from it and benefit from it.
Does that make sense? So, it's not as if
we're doing low volume because we're
lazy. We're doing low volume because
doing more isn't actually more
beneficial and can be detrimental
because it interferes with our ability
to recover from that work. Now, let's
talk about practical recommendation for
programming. So the way that I use these
tools of training splits is best used as
a tool to distribute volume across the
week. So the best way to distribute
total volume as best as you can. There's
minimal evidence showing meaningful
differences between two sessions per
week versus three. Okay? So therefore,
my strong recommendation, if you have
the option, move towards two times
frequency per body part per week. If you
only have one time available, so be it.
quite often even if you've got two
sessions per week I make it so with
these training splits that you are
prioritizing two times per week which
can be done and this is going to be
sorted in 2 days per week splits versus
3 days versus 4 days versus 5 days and
there's special mention to six days per
week as well okay so if you ever want to
come back if you're ever creating a
program and you want to try some optimal
splits for your clients or yourselves
then you come back here as a great
reference point so remember what I was
saying so for some people, you have to
understand, you know, what's not just
optimal, but what's practically
available for the individual. You could
be working with general population or a
new mom who's a full-time mom that
doesn't have time to train in the gym
and they're doing the best that they can
and can maybe only just scrape in two
times per week. Okay? Or someone who
prioritized, they run a busy company and
they just don't have time to train and
they can only afford to allocate two
days per week. or let's go to athletic
population, professional athletes that
need to be spending every single day
training their sport and they don't have
the energy. They have the time, they
make the time, they're professional
athletes. However, too much training
might negatively impact the recovery
requirements of their sport and might
interfere with their ability to
effectively train their sport. Okay? So,
two days per week. So, the first
question we ask anybody is how many days
do you have practically available to
allocate to your training session, to
your strength training? Next thing
that's pretty important to understand,
if you're training two times per week, I
highly recommend taking your exercises
to a close proximity to failure. Quite
often you might hear me talk about
periodizing effort where we start our
week one of any of our programs with
conservative loads to allow room to
progress from week to week. Now, this
also allows room for recovery for the
remainder of the week. Okay? So, I talk
about treating it like a marathon where
we pace ourselves at the start of the
marathon. We don't start by sprinting so
that we can have a successful entire
race. Okay? Now, here's the thing. When
it comes to two days per week, that is a
sprint. All right? It's not a marathon
anymore. That is a sprint. You want to
send it. So, if all you have is 2 days
and you got 5 days to recover, okay?
That's one of the largest re one of the
biggest reasons why people recommend not
training to fail all the time is to
allow for greater recovery. Okay?
Greater recovery for other sessions
within the week. Heavy squats and heavy
deadlifts per performed in the same week
can interfere with each other as some of
you may know. So, we have strategies to
combat that. But if you're only training
two times per week, that means you got 5
days to rest. You don't want to consider
recovery. You got 5 days to recover.
You're going to be recovered. You're not
going to overtrain. Send it. Okay? And
on the flip side, the higher the
frequency, the lower the intensity
should be. Now, here's some examples of
two-day splits. Here's the first one
that I used to always do and now I
don't. That's an upper lower split. Day
one, upper body. Day two, lower body.
It's not a bad option, but limited by
fatigue. So, what does that mean? So,
that means you're training the entire
upper body in one session, which means
the first half of the session might be
great, but because you're saturating the
same muscle groups, the last half of the
session is going to be pretty fatigued
and you're going to be performing junk
volume compared to splitting that up
into two sessions in the week. Okay? As
well as remember the deal with
frequency, optimal frequency where you
have the option, let's opt for two times
per week versus one. Okay? Next thing,
if you're doing two times per week,
prioritize compound movements. You don't
really want to waste time on doing bicep
curls, leg extensions, hamstring curls.
Go and do your big compound movements.
Go and beat yourself up. This is my
preference. You know, the way that I was
going to present this to you was just to
have only one option, which was, and
[clears throat] I remember writing this
out saying whole body splits. There is
no excuse not to do whole body splits.
If you're doing two times per week,
train your whole body. What does that
mean? A push, a pull, a squat, and a
bend pattern all in one session. Okay?
And if you're doing two sessions per
week, I mean, you can, but my
recommendation is to not do the same
session. Okay? So, so I would do a a hip
dominant squat pattern on day one and a
knee dominant squat pattern on day two.
Okay? For push, I would do a vertical
push on day one and a horizontal push on
day two. Okay? And so on. You get the
point. There's no single exercise that
focuses on every single muscle fiber
available in that specific muscle. Okay?
We have portions of every muscle and
different exercises focus on different
portions of every muscle which is why we
have a need for some training variation.
I'm not saying we need a ton of
variation. I need we I'm saying we need
some variation to make sure that we have
a better opportunity to completely train
an entire muscle. Okay, if we have the
option, if we're doing two-day splits,
this is the one that we do. Whole body
split. This is my recommendation. Okay,
versus upper body on one day, lower body
on another day. Now, let's go to
three-day splits. Great option for
athletes of non-strength sports. So, as
I mentioned, two days is probably a good
option for non-strength sport athletes,
but so is three if they have it
available to them. It's still, in my
opinion, not the most optimal for
maximizing muscle and strength gain. It
does work, and there are instances at
the highest level where 3 days is the
preference for the best strength
athletes in the world. So, as you guys
know who my strength mentors are, Eric
Liybridge and his father and coach Ernie
Liybridge Senior. Their method that they
taught me and I learned so much from and
I apply many of their principles today.
The Lily Bridge method is a 3-day split,
which I'm going to give you in a moment.
And the reason it works so well is
because they're lifting so damn heavy.
They're squatting and deadlifting in
excess of 400 kg. So, when you do that,
the demand for recovery is quite high.
Okay? And you know, trying to squat and
deadlift heavy every single week on two
separate occasions. So that's why they
combine it in one day. Trying to do it
in two separate days interferes with
each other for recovery. Ed, we still
aiming to hit 10 sets per body part per
session on the 2-day versus a whole body
split. This is what we need to consider.
It becomes incredibly hard if we do
that. The whole idea of, you know,
getting four days of training per week
versus two days per training per week is
so that we can achieve optimal amount of
training volume. When we're doing less
days per week, we have less time to
achieve 10 sets per muscle group per
week. So, in some instances, it's not
possible. In other instances, I'll tell
you now, Eric Liybridge only doing three
times per week, but his squat sessions
would last him hours. He has a meal in
between his in the middle of his
session. Okay? So, there's the the added
context. So, he does a heavy squat. For
him to get to his top set of squats, it
would probably take him about an hour
and a half to two hours. And then he's
doing his accessory deadlifts after
that. So, he'd have a meal in between.
and then he'd perform another hour and a
half of training with his accessory
exercises. Okay, so there's the context.
So it's not as if he's just training
less because he's training three times
per week. He's condensing the hell out
of that session. Is it optimal? I don't
know. It works. There's many ways to
skin a cat. To be honest with you, I've
used all of the methods, everything that
I find to be valuable out of the Lily
Bridge method, but I still prefer to
spread it out over four days, which is
why I do four-day splits for myself as
well as all of the athletes that I work
with that I have the option of doing
4-day splits. But I do reserve the
understanding and the knowledge of an
optimal 3-day split if it's required.
So, here's an option for a 3-day split.
Whole body every session works well.
Okay, so whole body every session. So,
what does whole body mean? I would
recommend four movement patterns. push,
pull, squat, bend in one session. So,
four big exercises. That's what a whole
body looks like to me. Okay. Now, can
you do this? Yeah, it does work well in
my opinion, except for highly elite
lifters. And when I talk about highly
elite, I'm really mainly referring to
high absolute strength athletes,
athletes with a high absolute strength.
So, you can get like elite level
athletes that are smaller. So, you know,
you got people like, you know, females
or 60 kg, you know, 60 kg lifters or 70
kilogram lifters. can you know what's
relatively strong for that individual a
triple body weightight squat for that
individual is 210 kg that is incredible
don't get me wrong however it takes a
lot shorter of a time to warm up to a
200 kg lift than a 400 kg lift okay so
that's the context that needs to be
added so a lighter lifter with high
relative strength but lower absolute
strength might be able to warm up to
their top sets in a shorter amount of
time so that's the only downfall of
training whole body in a session is how
long does to take you because you still
need to after you've done your squats
you then need to warm up for your
deadlifts. Then after that you need to
warm up for your push then after that
you need to warm up for your pull. If
you have high absolute strength that can
take hours. So that's my recommendation
is don't do whole body if you're really
really really strong. We still the same
question. I'm not going to answer that
again. So that's one option is whole is
whole body. The next option is the lily
bridge split which I quite like.
Squatting and deadlifting on one day.
Okay. So the way that they rotate it is
week one is heavy squats and light
deadlifts and then week two it's heavy
deadlifts and light squats and then they
continue to rotate that. So they are
doing it all on one day. Okay. And in my
opinion this works extremely well
because they have high absolute strength
and they need that much recovery. Okay.
That's why they don't do heavy squats
and heavy deadlifts in the same week.
The second session is a heavy bench
session. Okay. So that's day two. It's
upper body. I say upper body but they
call it a heavy bench press session. But
for our context, a heavy bench press,
I'll always do a structurally balanced
upper body day on a heavy bench press
day. So that's upper body day, we could
say. And then day three is their whole
body day. So I quite like this. I think
if you have three days available to you,
this is a really nice option. The next
option, pushpull legs. Okay, pushpull
legs over three days. This is quite
popular. People have different
variations of what pushpull legs means
to them. Some people perform their
deadlifts on pull day. Okay, so push
might be, you know, all the pecs. So
pecs, triceps, and deltoid. It's all of
the pushing muscles. So that's what push
day is. Pulling is literal pulling. So
deadlifting, pull-ups, pull downs, and
rows all performed on that one day. And
then legs on the third day. Okay. So
does it work? Yeah, it works. In my
opinion, it's not enough frequency,
particularly in the upper body. So
you've only got one pressing day. Even
if you do 20 sets in that one day, the
last sets of that day, the last 10 sets
are junk volume. Okay? you're better off
dividing that over two sessions. Okay,
so there's one of the downfalls. The
second downfall is it's not enough
frequency for the quadriceps. Okay, so
this is something we have to understand.
Okay, so quadriceps and deadlifts are
kind of two different things. If you
have a squat on one day and a deadlift
on another day, that's that's pretty
good frequency for the hip extensors. So
the deadlift is a hip extension. So is a
squat. So we've got two times per week
frequency for the hip extensors, which
is optimal, but we've only got one time
frequency for quadriceps. Okay, so this
is me playing devil's advocate. Why I
don't particularly recommend a pushpull
legs split for a 3-day per week athlete.
Not enough frequency for quadriceps or
upper body push. Next variation, daily
undulating programming. Okay, very
popular amongst powerlifterss. So the
idea of this is essentially it's split
up into squat, bench press, and
deadlifts performed every single day.
But if you have a look at the order,
okay, so it's day one. So have a look
above. So we've got day one, day two,
day three. So above those are heavy,
moderate and light. So the first
exercise we go heavy, the second
exercise we go moderate, the third
exercise we go light. Okay? And we sort
that in a way so that every one of those
lifts, so squat gets one heavy session
per week, one moderate session per week,
and one light session per week. And same
applies for all of those lifts. Okay? So
that's split up into how I would
allocate those heavy, moderate, and
light for each of those days. The pros
of this, great frequency for skill
acquisition. You're performing each of
these lifts three times per week. Great
for skill acquisition. The cons to this,
I would recommend that this is too much
frequency for elite, high absolute
strength lifters. So you can be elite
but low body weight and high relative
strength but not a high absolute
strength. In which case you'd be able to
recover from multiple days of frequency.
So three days of frequency per week,
you'd be able to recover from that
really nicely. But as you get really
really really strong. So like Thor
Bjönson coming in and he's pretty soon
he's going to be doing 400 kg deadlifts
every damn week and to the point where
I'm going to have to divide that so he
only goes heavy every second week. All
right, so take it from me. He'll do dead
deadlift once a week. So heavy week,
light week, heavy week, light week. But
his ability to recover, he needs seven
days of recovery. He needs 14 days of
recovery from heavy to heavy. In between
he's doing a skill session. Okay, so
that's a huge amount of recovery demand
for a super super high absolute strength
athlete. He would not be able to do two
more deadlift sessions that week. Even
if it was moderate and light, that's too
much frequency for him to be able to
recover from. He wouldn't be able to get
in position. It wouldn't feel good. It
wouldn't be effective. Okay. So now, the
negative to this, and I mean I'm not
saying that people don't do this, but I
would recommend if you were to do push,
pull, and legs. So, so my con to this is
it needs upper back exercises. Daily
undulating periodization where you're
going squat bench dead, just add your
rows and pull downs in here as well.
Okay? Which can easily be done. Just so
that you know, just adding context. Some
highle powerlters only ever always do
squat, bench press, and deadlift and
nothing else. So that's pure specificity
and they reach high levels doing this.
It's not my recommendation, but just
letting you know it exists at a high
level and it works. I just find other
ways work better such as not neglecting
muscle groups such as, you know, your
lats and your boys and your back and
your traps and and your arms and other
groups as well. Okay, strength systems.
Every time I give my recommendation, I
give it the strength system signature.
Okay. So, this is the strength system
three-day split, which I believe is a
50/50 of all muscle groups. Okay. So,
day one is lower body squat focus or or
squat day, quadriceps focused. Day two
is whole upper body and then we have day
three. So, this is where day three I
kind of call it an whole body day. But
you have to understand the way that I
allocate the whole body is the first
exercise is deadlifts. So, that's where
we kind of like focus. That's the main
exercise. Then, we apply secondary squat
patterns to that. So, we're giving
ourselves a second day of of quadricep
work. So, it could just be leg
extensions. Okay? It could be as simple
as that, but this is something that I
reserve for high strength athletes that
are doing less days per week is make
sure at the very least you can add in
some leg extensions. You can always add
in leg extensions. That's where you're
getting your second day of frequency.
Okay? Something that I like to consider
with, you know, 5 days of frequency is,
you know, there is data, not the best
data, not the best research, but I kind
of agree with it that your muscles stop
responding after about or they stop
growing after 5 days of recovery. Okay,
at which point they start shrinking.
That's interesting. We've got a red
cross on that page. Just ignore that.
Someone was having a squiggle. Does that
make sense, guys? So, we have deadlift
secondary squats. Someone's still
writing on there. Dear me, said Boris.
Do you guys get access to writing on
that? Can you not, please? If that was
me, I swear I'd draw a penis in the
corner, but it's not me and I don't want
to give you guys ideas. Anyhow, no more
drawing on here. You're on detention if
you do. Oh, sorry. It's okay, Boris.
Thank you for not drawing a penis. It's
going to be on all of it now. Can you
see if you can undo it? It doesn't
really matter so much. I won't let it
take our attention. So, this was a Jimmy
contribution. Thank you, Jimmy. Is he
even here anymore? Probably not. He's
doing work. So, he basically said,
"Should we include another day for the
ladies?" Now, the idea of this is it's a
lower body split. Now, I'm not here
recommending that women need to train
differently to men, but I'm talking from
a place of experience now is a lot of
women come to me asking to apply more
volume or more work or more emphasis on
their lower body and less on their upper
body. Okay? And I've been doing this for
many many years and I'm also part owner
in a female only facility where I have
access to a lot of women's programs and
a lot of women's feedback. Okay? So,
understand it is a thing. It's not my
recommendation. I don't recommend
anything. I recommend you train for the
goals that you want to have. But if
someone comes to me and they say, "I
want to emphasize lower body dominance
and deemphasize upper body." Here's your
option. Okay? So, this is where we only
have one day of upper body per week. The
same principle applies on our deadlift
day. I would add more quadriceps work.
Okay? At the very least, I would be
doing leg extensions. Okay? So, there's
a nice little option for you. If you
have any questions, just feel free to to
put in the comment section. I'm going
through this very fast because there's a
lot more splits to come. 4 day splits.
Now, we're entering advanced lifter
territory. This is my recommendation for
anyone who wants the absolute most out
of their resistance training. Whether
the goal is performance or muscle
building, you don't have to be advanced
to benefit from strength training four
times per week. You just have to want
the most out of your training. Okay?
Four days per week. I train four days
per week. Thor Bjönson trains four days
per week. Enough said. I do train elite
lifters. Okay? Okay. So, so one in
particular, Stephie Cohen, she's 5 days
per week. What's the difference? She
weighs under 60 kg. Thorbjson's 200 kg.
Very big difference, especially when we
consider the loads lifted, the absolute
strength. The higher the absolute
strength, the greater the need for
recovery. The lower the absolute
strength, even though it's high relative
strength. So, what's the difference?
Relative strength means we factor in
body weight. So, that's the power to
weight ratio, you could call it. Okay?
So, we factor in body weight. So Stephie
Cohen, four times bodyweight deadlifter,
but that's still 240 kg. That's still
less than 50% of Thor Bjöson's max. So
do we understand the picture, the
illustration of what absolute strength
is versus relative strength? The greater
the absolute strength, the greater the
demand for recovery. Rest between sets
need to increase and rest between
sessions need to increase. Okay. But if
your goal, if you're a strength athlete
or if you just want the most out of your
strength training, your resistance
training, can you share the definition
of your absolute strength? Yeah. The
person who lifts the most weight.
There's the definition. The person that
can lift the most weight has the
greatest amount of absolute strength.
There's my definition. Okay. So,
elephant high absolute strength and very
poor absolute strength. Massive relative
strength. But no one cares. Sorry, my
lighter weightlifters. I shouldn't say
that. I'm just getting nasty. Critters
giving me death stares. Critter has big
absolute strength anyway. That guy just
add, let me add context. 70 kilo guy
with a 300 kilogram squat and deadlift.
So, it's more than four times body
weight. So he has high absolute strength
and high relative strength. So I guess
you win whatever. Now remember what I
said about the strength system standard.
Okay. Covers all bases. Five gold stars.
This gets five gold stars. That's quite
an unofficial accolade. You know, unless
unless you take it, then it's very
official. It's official coming from me.
If you want the most out of your
training and if you want a balanced
approach, this is how I'm going to coach
you. This is how I coach myself. Okay?
So that's an upper lower split. So upper
body push pull horizontal focus. So
horizontal push pull it doesn't mean so
it's focus on horizontal but it doesn't
mean I don't use any vertical
accessories. Okay. So it's upper body
one day lower body quad focus the next
day then upper body vertical focus the
next day and then lower body posterior
focus the fourth day. Okay. Where we
still include quadricep accessories. In
my opinion it's the most balanced
variation of the 4-day split. It covers
all bases. Now here's the female athlete
version. So, I work with many females
that have asked specifically for these
modifications. Okay? You don't have to.
Okay? If you get offended, that's up to
you. You can give the the strength
system split, which I give to many of my
female athletes, and they look awesome,
and they perform really, really well.
But some people specifically request
less muscularity in the upper body, and
this is my solution, is less total
volume in the upper body. The way that I
do that is I only have one completely
allocated upper body day. So, it's the
same thing except instead of the second
upper body day, I give them a full body
day, okay? Which is push, pull, squat,
bend. So, they're still training upper
body twice per week, but it's just less
total volume and more total volume on
lower body. So, there's my disclaimer at
the expense of sounding like I'm
recommending females and males train
differently to each other. In my
experience, the vast majority of women
that I have worked with over the years
request a lower body dominant training
split. Okay? And this is how I would do
it if that's you. Now, we move to 5day
splits. All right, we're cooking. 5day
splits is the upper end of my
recommendations for resistance training
frequency. Okay. Yes, I write six day
programs, but 5 days is the upper end of
my recommendations. 6 days not my
recommendations. Remember, I will give a
six-day program for cases where the
individual needs to be at the gym. They
need to have a rigid schedule for
whatever reasons. Okay, mental health is
maybe a huge reason for that. It's for
lifters who prioritize their results
with resistance training, whether it's
performance or aesthetics with muscle
building. Here's the caveat. The
frequency can be too high if the lifter
has a strong has a high absolute
strength. Okay? So, the frequency can be
too high if the lifter has a high
absolute strength. Okay? So, this is
what I'm talking about with Thor Thor
Bjönson. So, I use that as an
illustration for the person who devotes
his life to being the strongest human on
the planet and has achieved that four
days per week. would do five, would day
seven, he would do seven, he would do
seven days a week, two times a day if it
guaranteed that that's what would
achieve a positive result, but it
doesn't. Okay, there is a need for
recovery. So, we have the stimulus,
okay, which is the training session.
Then we have the recovery that's
required for the adaptations to occur.
Okay, you take the recovery out of that
and just give more stimulus, stimulus,
stimulus with no recovery. We get no
adaptations. I'm sure we get some
adaptations. That's a lie. Okay. But we
get lesser adaptations. So here's my
variations of a 5day split. This is what
I quite like. So it's a pushpull legs up
or lower. So it's a it's a combination
of two splits. Pushpull legs up or
lower. Quite like this. Okay. Great
split. It can be too much for high
absolute strength athletes. Again 5
days. It's the same disclaimer. Okay.
But it's optimal for lightweight high
relative strength athletes. Okay.
Currently I am coaching Stephie Cohen
and I'm writing her a 5 day a week
split. That's her preference and that's
optimal for her. She has the time to
allocate to it. She has the resources to
allocate the sufficient recovery for it.
So she gets in all of her other recovery
modalities. So sleep and nutrition and
intelligent training is the best way to
recover. Okay. But things like sauna,
cold therapy, massage, whatever other
modalities, if it makes you feel good,
yeah, it can contribute. But from a
research standpoint, Dtier compared to
sleep, recovery, and nutrition is S
tier. So S tier being the best. I always
thought A is, but you know, this
generation S tier is better than A. Not
sure why, but it's just S tier. Hope you
guys understand. I'm sure you do. I'm
sure you do. Five day bro split. What's
a 5-day bro split? This is bodybuilder
split. Here it is. Body part per day.
Day one chest. Day two back. Day three
legs. Day four shoulders. Day five arms.
That's the 5-day bro split. Okay. It's a
typical bodybuilder split. It allows for
high concentration of each muscle per
day and 7 days of recovery post session.
It can work, but there are some
disadvantages of high fatigue in the
second half of any session when we're
trying to condense 100% of our training
volume in one day. Okay, we are going to
be performing the second half of that
session under huge amount of fatigue.
And are you actually getting a result
from that? Some people actually suggest
no, you're not, which is the definition
of junk volume. So the law of
diminishing returns applies. So if you
were to do five sets of any exercise,
just the first five sets, I'll tell you
now, you get the absolute most return on
investment after the first set. And then
apparently, not that I know the exact
data, but there is a significant drop
off in returns on investment on the
second set as well as the third, there
is a decrease in returns and the fourth
and the fifth. Okay. The law of
diminishing returns applies. Something
that I absolutely loved when I heard
Alex Horoszi say it. diminishing returns
are still returns. Okay, so here's a big
difference with elite level lifters and
not the elite level lifters doing those
extra sets. They understand the law of
diminishing returns and they understand
they are getting a less of a carryover
from those sets but it's still a
carryover. Less of a carryover, but it's
still a carryover. The highest level
athletes in the world, an illustration
that I like to use is Olympic level
weightlifters will train for four years
for the next Olympics only to beat or
not even beat or to tie or whatever, but
very rarely improve by much in four
years of progression in the Olympics.
They might improve by 1 kilogram in four
years and that is a successful four
years if it meant that they won the
gold. Okay, so that's adding a little
bit of context to the level of
expectation of elite. I don't want to
say advanced. There's a next level up.
Elite lifters and the rest of us. Okay.
So, the return on investment decreases,
but there are still returns. Okay.
Critter. In Japan, ranking systems often
include an S rank above A. Okay.
Interesting. The S is most commonly
understood to come from Japanese loan
usage, meaning special or super, rather
than a literal alphabet progression. I
love that. Thank you, Critter. I thought
it came from anime, which was also
Japanese. So, there we go. It still has
the Japanese origin. And thank you for
the definition. So, now we all know S
tier. S tier is a thing. Okay. Now,
here's something about the bros split
that I don't like. Here's two things
about the bros split that I don't like.
Frequency of once per week. Remember, if
you have the option, go two. Okay.
Frequency of once per week. Even though
you are saturating that muscle group and
you're probably going to be in so much
soreness that you feel as though you
need seven days to recover and you can
actually achieve meaningful gains with
seven days of recovery and only
performing frequency of once per week.
Okay? Research supports that, practical
application supports that. You still get
gains. Two days is still better. Okay?
two days is still better. So, there's
one downfall. The next downfall, you're
training four days of upper, one day of
lower. Okay, that just bothers me. I
don't know. All I see is really jacked
upper body and very skinny legs. Not a
good look. Okay, so that's chicken legs.
Chicken legs. If you like the look of
chicken legs, you should do the bro
split. For me, I'm unfortunately upper
body dominant, not by choice. And well,
actually, it is by choice. It was by the
wrong choice when I started. This was
the split that I used to do once per
week and 4 days upper. And I have an
upper body dominant physique. So, I've
spent the rest of my training career
trying to balance that out. Big dog, did
you catch my question or did you miss
the answer? I did not catch your
question. Where is it? Okay. If you want
to build your squat, can you still train
bench twice a week as well as a squat
without becoming too fatigued?
Absolutely. So, here's you have to
understand. Okay. Let me use that
analogy. Let me use Krill SVev as the
analogy or as the illustration. Kill
Sachev is my bench press mentor. He was
previously the world record holding
bench presser with a 335 kg bench press.
It has been beaten by a man that weighed
30 kilograms heavier than him, which is
Julius Maddox. So, Kil Sachev 335,
Julius Maddox 355, right? So, it's 20
kilograms more from a guy who weighs 30
kg more. So, I'm not doing the
pound-for-pound thing, but I still
factor it in. I consider that Carrill as
a the best technical bench presser of
the heavyweight bench presses in the
world. Now, when he trains for his bench
only competition, trains four days per
week, two days bench, one heavy, one
light, and one day squat, one day
deadlift. Okay? So, even when he's
training for a bench press competition,
he still does lower body in that week.
He just uses a lower intensity. Okay. He
just uses lower Jazz. I got his route.
Don't worry, Jack. I'll answer it for
you. I'd love to hear your answer. By
all means, go for it. Uh, don't put it
on on Mike. Just write it in. I want to
see it. I'll I'll I'll give you a mark
after this. And we're using the tier
system. If it deserves an S tier, I'll
give it. Okay. It must be if it must be
if you're critiquing my answer. Anyway,
I'm only joking. I'd love to hear your
answer. Okay. So, next day, 5day split.
So, check this out. I hope that answered
your question, Jack. Yeah, absolutely.
You can squat and prioritize your bench.
This is what I paid Charles Pollin
$1,000 an hour for. All right, so this
is one of my consultations that I had
with him. That's how much he slugged me.
And you know, when someone charges you
that much money, you hang on to every
word. And I've used this since, you
know, since I did it with him, which was
about 15 years ago since I had the
consultations with him. So, check this
out for a split. It is highly
considered. I quite love it. So, it's
basically it's fiveday split, okay?
lower body three times, upper body
twice. So let's have a look at it. So we
have a look at from week one to week
two, there's just a slight modification.
Okay, so the upper body days remain the
same. So that's day two and day four is
upper body. Okay, 1, three, and five is
where it changes. Okay, in week one, we
go squat, deadlift, squat. In week two,
we go deadlift, squat, deadlift, and
then we just rotate. So what does that
allow for? It allows for 3 to four days
of recovery between our upper body
sessions, which is optimal. So you bench
press on Monday and Thursday, say, or
Tuesday and Friday, whatever it is.
That's 3 to four days of recovery
between your bench press sessions and
then you squat on Monday and Saturday
and Wednesday and Monday and Saturday
and Wednesday. Monday and Saturday and
Wednesday. So you're giving yourself 5
days of recovery for the squat sessions
and you deadlift Wednesday, Monday,
Saturday, Wednesday, Monday, Saturday.
That make sense? Okay. So between squat
days, you're giving yourself 5 days
recovery. Deadlift days, you're giving
yourself 5 days recovery. Upper body
days, you're giving yourself 3 to four
days recovery. I quite love this.
However, I have a small complaint with
it, which you're going to see here,
which has the five gold stars. Thank you
very much. The strength system standard.
You know, no hate on Charles Poloquin.
Nothing but love from me. That guy
taught me like probably was the biggest
influencer when it comes to my
programming knowledge and understanding
of strength coaching. Okay, may he rest
in peace. However, in my opinion, squats
need less time to recover than
deadlifts. So to give them equal
priority, which means five days a week
for squats and five days a week for
deadlift is a little bit of an imbalance
in my opinion. I would prefer to allow
for more recovery for deadlifts and
slightly less for squats. My sweet spot
sweet spot sweet spot is two times a
week for upper body, two times a week
for squats, one time per week for
deadlifts. Okay? So my split is not a
rotation of two weeks. It's essentially
five days. So we go squat twice, upper
body twice, and deadlift once. So, if
you came to me for a 5day split, that's
my strength system, five gold star
standard. Okay? It's very similar to the
Polyquin split. Okay? But I would say
it's probably a little bit more
appropriate for the heavier deadlifters.
Okay? I know some deadlifters, and this
is something that we have to consider,
okay? I'll always play devil's advocate
on myself. I know like for me, when I
was at my my strength peak, I would come
in every single squat session, and I
don't care what you put on the bar, it
feels good, okay? I'll just go down and
up. I don't care what you put on the
bar. But when it comes to deadlift, it's
so damn temperamental for me where I
would come in one session and blast it
and then the next session my confidence
is skyhigh and I'm weak. I don't know
what it is. I just it's just so
temperamental. Now, I work with many
lifters who are exactly like that except
for deadlifts. So, they come in, they
can come in and pick up anything off the
floor at any given day with higher
frequency, low frequency, whatever it
is. Their body's built for deadlifts.
But then when it comes to squats, it's
temperamental as deadlifts are for me.
What's the explanation for that? Okay,
I'll tell you my explanation for that.
Okay, so this is what I talk about
training morale. Squatterers love
squatting and hate deadlifting. You come
into your session like me with the
attitude of I hate deadlifts. That's
what you're going to cop and vice versa.
People that just love their deadlifts.
Okay, so their training morale is a lot
higher on these days. Now, here's a
little bit of the science, which isn't
backed by research. It's backed by
practical application, but I'll still
refer to it as the science. Heavy spine
loading multiple times per week ain't
happening with high absolute strength
athletes. Okay. So, you know, enter the
Lily Bridge method where they only they
squat and deadlift on the same day
because the spine can only
[clears throat] handle one heavy session
per week. Okay. So, when you come in and
you allocate all of your enjoyment and
your effort and your energy on your
squat day, I don't care what it is, the
second day of spine loading that week is
going to be negatively affected. Okay?
And vice versa. If you come in and you
have a big deadlift session, there's a
high likelihood that your squat's going
to suck that week. Okay? So this is when
we have to get crafty with our
programming strategy. If you remember
two weeks ago, I gave you the
programming strate strategy for that
which is called weekly undulating
programming. If you remember it, if you
don't remember it, that whole episode is
two weeks old on our circle group. Go
and watch it at any time. Okay. Yeah. So
you can squat day 1, day five. That is
very cool. And that is my optimal if I
was to do a 5day split. Okay. All right.
Last, I don't want to say last but not
least, I would say kind of least six day
split. I don't really do it. Okay. It's
the option that I reserve for people
that just love to be in the gym for
whatever reason. I'm trying to be nice
about this when I say a lot of people
suffer from depression, okay? For
whatever reasons. I work with a lot of
people that are like this and they need
to be in the gym or they're going to do
something horrible. Okay? So, those
people exist. So, fine. I'm going to
give that to you. I'm not going to take
it away from you. Okay? So, therefore,
I'm going to write you a six-day split
that works. Okay? I don't think it's
superior. Okay? Now, six days doesn't
mean I'm going to do more more volume.
I'm going to do the same amount of
volume but just spread it out over those
six days. And my preferred split for
that is pushpull legs, pushpull legs.
Okay, so that's my split if I was to
write you a six day program. Push pull
legs, push pull legs. Now, the way that
I do it, my interpretation of this, the
deadlift goes on lower body day. It
doesn't go on pull day. Pull is upper
body pull. Okay. So, what's the
difference between this and my 4-day
split? Actually, not much except for
it's spread out over the four days. For
my 4-day split, I do upper body push
pull in the one session. For my six
days, I divide it. So, one day is push
and one day is pull. Okay? And then of
the leg days, I should have written day
three legs is quad dominant and day six
legs is posterior dominant or deadlift
dominant.
Damn, I'm good. That's 5:00 p.m. and I
am finished.
Okay, my team. So,
there is today's session on training
splits. I hope that helped. I hope you
guys use this. I hope you found it
valuable. If you ever are to write a
program um and play around with your
splits, please come back and reference
these slides and this video. I love you
all. I love you all. Now, that was a
1-hour session that I gave to my
mentorship group. So, this is something
that I do every single week with a whole
bunch of amazing industry professionals
that are personal trainers with so many
different goals. Some people own gyms,
some people are expert online coaches,
and some people are beginners. But this
session was based on training splits.
Every good coach needs to know how to
write great programs. And that's a huge
component of program design is
understanding all of the different
splits that are available to us. And of
course, this comes with conditions,
which I hope that I thoroughly explained
in that session. So, if you learned
something from that, go and use it and
succeed with it and all of that good
stuff. And I hope you enjoy it. And if
you want more content like this, write
it in the comment section. And if you
want to join my mentorship group and
receive these education sessions every
single week plus be coached by me
because that's a part of the mentorship
is I believe that you need to be the
walking billboard for the product that
you sell. So that's why I coach and
program for all of the members of the
mentorship group. And if you want that
to be you then click the link wherever
it is down here and join my mentorship
group and learn from me firsthand.
Anyway, hope you enjoyed that session.
See you next time.